---
title: "Philippine bureaucrats botched the COVID-19 vaccine program, with denials and deflection"
linkTitle: "Bureaucrats botched the COVID-19 vaccine program"
date: 2021-04-27
author: "Richard Calayeg Cornelio, [Philippine Collegian](https://phkule.org/)"
description: The Duterte administration has had to navigate bureaucratic mazes of its own making and, along the way, failed to leap on vaccine deals that could have gotten the country to the front of the queue.
resources:
- src: "**.{png,jpg}"
  params:
    byline: 
---
{{< imgproc featured Fit "600x450" >}}President Rodrigo Roa Duterte confers with Cabinet Secretary Karlo Nograles during the meeting with the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Malacañan Palace on March 12, 2020. (Richard Madelo/Presidential Photo){{< /imgproc >}}

For all the [grim polls](http://www.pulseasia.ph/february-2021-nationwide-survey-on-covid-19/) and hectoring public health advisories, the Philippines has hardly even had to contend with vaccine hesitancy, which many government officials have for months flagged as a major challenge to combating the coronavirus. But the scale of such a problem is yet to be seen at this point, really, when the object of speculation has scarcely materialized. So far it is not the [public attitude to vaccines](https://phkule.org/article/115/how-to-think-about-vaccine-hesitancy-among-filipinos) that is at issue, when the government, by their own dawdling and bungling, does a better job than any conspiracy theory at losing what little confidence the people have in the vaccination program. 

Vaccine skeptics make for an easy punching bag, though. "May mga iba d’yan na ayaw talaga magbakuna. E, di okay na lang ‘yan sa akin. Ang problema kung makahawa ka,” President Rodrigo Duterte said in a televised speech, April 15. He dissed them and told them to die five times. 

Duterte offered a lecture on how to get away with a botched job. First, as in an April 13 speech, he deflected the blame, through cartoonish, frenzied fallacies, to boogeymen and scapegoats only Duterte could think to bring up: communists, whose opposition to the national ID system he claimed to have hampered the pandemic response; flying voters, who he said made it harder for local governments to parcel out COVID-19 aid; and the United States and company that are “refusing to understand or causing problems for other nations.” It did not take long for vaccine skeptics to go on Duterte’s chopping block. 

Next, the president had members of the national task force on COVID-19 flaunt facts and figures so carefully picked out to paint a picture of efficiency and competence. Vaccine czar Carlito Galvez Jr. reported, during Duterte’s pre-recorded meeting with Cabinet members on April 19, that the country ranked third in Southeast Asia, just behind Indonesia and Singapore, in terms of the number of COVID-19 vaccine doses administered, as per data from Bloomberg and the Foreign Service Posts.

“Maganda ang record natin despite unfounded criticisms… to think people were almost in a quandary where to get the next vaccination,” Duterte said. “Nakita mo naman, hindi pala tayo yung pinakamahina.”

Yet the numbers are only as impressive as the government’s effort to skate over its ineptitude and the magnitude of the challenge at hand. The roughly 3.025 million doses delivered to the Philippines, as of April 17, make up only about two percent of the government’s target of 148 million vaccine doses to procure. Granted the administration has eight more months to keep pace with its own timeline, it should still have, by now, gathered enough momentum to roll out the six batches of vaccines already on hand. 

We cannot fault officials for setting an ambitious goal, but nor can we congratulate them on a pandemic response so riddled with missteps and mistakes. While the economy craters and Filipinos grow restive, the Duterte administration has found itself navigating bureaucratic mazes of its own making and, along the way, failed to leap on vaccine deals that could have gotten the country to the front of the queue. 

Rich countries have indeed tended to corner and stockpile COVID-19 vaccine supplies that are nowhere near enough to satisfy the global demand, notwithstanding regulatory hurdles and shortages of raw ingredients and machinery. Duterte struck a similar note, if erroneously, when, in February, he blamed the European Union for holding AstraZeneca doses hostage despite the [country’s exemption](https://news.abs-cbn.com/video/news/02/03/21/eu-philippines-exempted-from-vaccine-export-ban) from the bloc’s export control. "We are not rich," he said. "This is a fight among the highest bidders who can pay first.”  

Even before this mad scramble, however, the government had already thrown away a shot at first dibs. It sat for almost five months, since June, on a confidentiality data agreement, the first in a bunch of paperwork to sort out prior to any vaccine purchase deal with Pfizer, a frontrunner in the vaccine race. Health Secretary Francisco Duque III has since [defended the delay](https://news.abs-cbn.com/news/12/17/20/duque-denies-causing-delay-in-access-to-pfizers-covid-19-vaccine) with confused references to a supposedly thorough back-and-forth between Pfizer and Philippine officials and to documents shuttled between “relevant technical offices,” as he so told *ANC’s Headstart* in December. 

But to chalk red tape up to a matter of erring on the side of caution, like Duque maintained, flies in the face of the deadly tradeoffs of such wavering. Other countries long anticipated the sort of panic-buying and marauding that had frayed global supply chains during the pandemic’s height. They clinched late-stage vaccine candidates, though they might strike out with several of their purchases, with most jabs’ efficacy still up in the air. Dud vaccines, after all, could just be tossed out. They would always be much cheaper than the possibly millions more lives squandered if there were no vaccines to go around at all as new surges and virus variants cropped up.

Meanwhile, for all Duterte’s insistence that only vaccines could rescue us from a life in lockdown, the Philippine government refused to go big. Its war chest would only pay for where there is a chance at profit and power play, as in big-ticket infrastructure projects and militarist campaigns. We are not deficient in funding, what with P75 billion of the P82.5 billion budget for vaccines in 2021 already “[in place](https://www.dof.gov.ph/dof-assures-public-of-sufficient-funds-for-covid-19-vaccination/),” according to the Department of Finance in January. Much of it will come from international financial institutions like the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, on top of the funds allocated under Bayanihan 2 and this year’s P4.5-trillion national budget.

Commitments from multilateral lenders may foot the bill for advance payments to their vaccine makers of choice. This would skirt the 15-percent limit on advance payments, consistent with the government procurement rules, that had precluded both the Duterte administration and local authorities from paying at least 50 percent of advance market commitments that pharmaceuticals require for vaccine reservations. Only in February, after much prodding, did Duterte sign an order lifting such a cap. 

"We have to queue, and we are last to queue because of our failure to make the advance payments early enough,” Senate Minority Leader Franklin Drilon told *ANC's Headstart* [in February](https://news.abs-cbn.com/news/02/22/21/mismanagement-to-blame-for-delay-in-covid-19-vaccines-arrival-says-drilon). "Just like the way the COVID-19 pandemic was handled, there’s mismanagement in the handling of the supply agreements." 

Drilon belied what pandemic managers pointed out, then, as a bottleneck with Congress and the Senate in passing a bill for an indemnification fund and a “no-fault” clause as part of the negotiations with the World Health Organization (WHO) and Gavi, two of the organizations leading the COVAX facility, a global vaccine-sharing pool. Galvez and Duque, as well as presidential spokesperson Harry Roque, separately imputed the [stalled COVAX-facilitated shipment](https://news.abs-cbn.com/news/02/11/21/documents-snag-arrival-of-pfizers-covid-19-shots-in-philippines-palace) of Pfizer's coronavirus shots, in mid-February, to the manufacturer’s allegedly last-minute demand for indemnification to preempt lawsuits similar to what the Aquino administration had pursued against another drug company, Sanofi, over the Dengvaxia scare.

Yet it was Galvez who [failed to alert lawmakers](https://newsinfo.inquirer.net/1399375/senators-urgency-of-indemnity-law-raised-only-in-february) to the urgency of COVAX prerequisites of which the WHO and Gavi, as early as November, had already informed all participating countries. They were not picking on the Philippines. Our task force negotiators simply exercised no due diligence, let alone assumed any sense of accountability for gaffes that cost us time and resources we could barely eke out.

Accountability is, however, a tall order for a president who has shunned political acumen and appears just as lost about the policies he himself has signed into law. “I think we cannot even do that even if we wanted to, assuming liability for the stuff bought by the provinces. Tell them it cannot be," Duterte told Galvez in a March 22 speech, rejecting the concept of liability shields in tripartite agreements. By then, however, he had already [signed off](https://www.rappler.com/nation/duterte-signs-law-speeding-up-vaccine-purchase-creating-indemnity-fund) on a bill ratified by Congress providing for just exactly that. 

The odds of weathering this public health crisis sane and unscathed can swing either way, depending on one man’s caprices and comprehension of risks and reality at any given time. Though we can, and must, brave out the pandemic, through sheer will and mutual aid, if nothing else, the more lingering emergency is what Duterte represents and has set out to foment and leave behind as soon as the dust settles. 

Even now, his allies in the national pandemic response team, who may remain long after Duterte leaves the political stage, seem to take after him, in rhetoric if not in deed. With political chutzpah and self-righteousness, they recast all sorts of actors—Duterte’s predecessors, the communists, critics, anti-vaxxers, rich economies—as stupes and bullies and villains out to foil their best-laid plans. Criticisms are taken and chewed out as vehement spins and infantile tantrums. Then, always on the defensive, they would refuse to level with the public and rather report out and dwell only on drop-in-the-bucket accomplishments.

Sure, we cannot expect the government to cite, say, the [pandemic response index](https://interactives.lowyinstitute.org/features/covid-performance/) released by Lowly Institute, a Sydney-based think-tank, that ranked the Philippines as 79th out of 98 countries evaluated using indicators such as COVID-19 deaths and confirmed cases as a proportion of tests. Losers, though self-aware, rarely admit they choked. It pays to be honest, though, to own up to the blunders made and to reckon with their far graver implications down the line should they remain unaddressed. 

Matters of policy and life and death do not afford us the luxury and hollow spectacle of self-preening speeches.  While Duterte has once described the country’s vaccination program as sluggish and fitful, this is not an admission of culpability so much as pointing out the obvious. His anodyne assurances and trollish threats can only do so much. 

So far, as of writing, only around 1.46 million doses from China’s Sinovac and British-Swedish company AstraZeneca have been given and still failed to cover the 1.7 million health care workers who are on top of the priority list and whom Galvez said would have been inoculated by the end of the first quarter. The limited doses barely deterred several government officials from [jumping the line](https://phkule.org/article/77/from-smuggling-to-line-jumping-a-rundown-of-everything-that-is-wrong-with-the-philippines-vaccination-drive)—a clear violation of the terms of the COVAX program, according to WHO Philippines representative Dr. Rabindra Abeyasinghe, that could force the facility to withhold from the country millions of free shots in the pipeline. 

By contrast, the [vaccine rollout in Myanmar](https://ourworldindata.org/covid-vaccinations), still in the throes of a military coup, has even fared more swimmingly, with about two per 100 people having received at least one dose of the jab. There is nowhere to go but up, so the platitude goes. But we cannot underestimate the Duterte administration’s willingness to imperil the wellbeing of thousands, the breadth of its recklessness and indifference, its capacity to set us back even farther and to plunge the country deeper into an economic slump. 

Duterte, captive of his own cockeyed politics, has still over a full year to either redeem or reprise what has so far been a malign and unavailing pandemic performance. Our expectations could go much lower at every turn. His latest slip in a speech on April 19 hardly inspires trust. At one point he asked everyone in the room what else was on the agenda. Someone coached him. “Ah, itong COVID? Oh, well,” he said. A leader who regards as an afterthought a pandemic that continues to convulse communities and customs offers no salvation. It is every vulnerable life and embattled institution that needs saving from him. 

{{% pageinfo %}}
Originally published in the [Philippine Collegian](https://phkule.org/article/125/bureaucrats-botched-the-covid-19-vaccine-program-with-denials-and-deflection).
{{% /pageinfo %}}